Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and this is
a lecture on regression to the mean,
as part of the Coursera regression class
in the data science specialization.
This class is co-taught with my
co-instructors, Jeff Leek and Roger Peng.
We're all in the department
of biostatistics
at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
of Public Health.
Regression to the mean was an important
milestone in the discovery of regression.
So we're going to talk about it.
It was discovered by Francis Galton.
Regression to mean ask
questions like this.
Why is that the children of very tall
parents also tend to be tall, but
not quite as tall as their parents?
And also, why are the children with very
short parents tend also to be very short,
but not quite as short as their parents.
We can also reverse whether we're talking
about the parents and the children.
Why do the parents of very short
children tend to also be short,
but not quite as short as their children?
And why do the parents of very tall
children tend also to, to be tall,
but not quite as tall as their children?
This often come, often comes up
when talking about athletes.
Athletes who are the best performing
one year tend to do a little bit worse
the next year and athletes who
are the worst performing one year
tend to do a little bit
better the next year.
Often people talk about
stocks in the same way.
Some of the best performing
stocks tend to go down.
We'll talk about why this is and
whether or not something is intrinsic or
whether it's a regression to the mean
effect, which is the important question.
These phenomena are all examples of so
called regression to the mean.
Regression to the mean,
as I mentioned in the previous slide,
was invented by Francis Galton
in this famous paper,
regression towards mediocrity in hered,
hereditary stature.
I like to think of regression to the mean
by thinking of the case where it's
a 100% regression to the mean.
So imagine if I were to simulate
pairs of standard normals.
So they have nothing to
do with one another,
they're independent standard normals.
Well, in this first vector of
standard normals that I generate.
If I were to take the largest one,
the chance that its pair in the second
vector is smaller will be high.
And this is simply saying that
the probability that Y is less than X,
given X is going to get bigger
as X heads to very large values.
The same thing in other words,
is that probability Y is greater than X.
Given that X equals X is going to get
bigger as X heads to smaller values.
This extreme version of
regression in the mean where
there's 100% regression to the mean
is what I like to think about.
However, in most cases
there's some blend of some,
some intrinsic component, and a noise.
Take, for example, if I were to give
every student in this class two quizzes.
Two very hard quizzes.
While the top performers likely
do know the material very better,
do know the, the, the material better.
However, quizzes
are imperfect instruments.
And heaven knows if I gave the quiz,
there's going to be a lot of error in
that, in the quiz as an instrument.
So there's some noise.
So the top performer might
either is probably a little
knows the material a little
bit better than everyone else.
But also may have
benefitted from some noise.
So in the second quiz,
they might perform a little bit worse.
Probably still well,
but a little bit worse.
The same thing for the worst performers.
It's often kind of fun to think about,
how much of the discussion
of sports is really just talking
about regression to the mean.
A person who has a phenomenal year in
baseball in their batting average one year
has a slightly lower one the next year.
Is that just regression to the mean?
It would be nice to figure
out how to quantify it.
This is what Francis Galton did with
regression in the first treatment of
regression in the mean.
We want to talk about how Francis Galton
used the idea of regression, and
particularly correlation, which we knows
intimately related to linear regression.
So particularly correlation,
to quantify regression to the mean, and
we're going to basically
do it with a picture, but
I want to set up the picture first
before I go through the r code.
In this case,
my X is going to be the child's height and
Y is going to be the parent's height.
I'm going to use a dataset where
the parent is a single parent,
the father in this case.
These data have all been normalized,
the Y and the X, so
they have 0 mean and unit variance.
And we should be very familiar with
this by now, being able to do that.
So recall if I've done that then
my regression line is going to
pass through the point 0, 0.
And also the slope, regardless of whether
the child's height is the outcome or
the parent's height is the outcome,
is now simply the correlation.
I want to also mention just a quick kind
of quirk of, of creating the plot is if
X is the outcome and you happen to plot
the outcome on the horizontal axis,
the slope of the line that you plot, needs
to have the slope 1 over the correlation.
And that's just simply because
I plotted it on the X,
I plotted the outcome on the X axis.
So just to remind you of that if you
get a little confused with a code.
So let's go through the code and
then once we get the plot that I'm going
to show you, we'll go through the,
the different parts of the plot to talk
about how looking at the correlation
quantified regression of the me,
regression of the mediocrity.
[SOUND] So let's go through the code and
how I'm creating my plot.
So the dataset is in the usingR library,
the data's father.son.
I'm going to define my y
as the son's heights, but
I'm going to subtract of the mean and
divide by the standard deviation.
I'm going to defi,
define my x as the father's heights and
I'm going to do the same.
Now x and y should both have mean 0 and
variance 1, and
you can check that yourself.
Rho is the standard Greek letter that
we use to represent correlations.
So I'm going to define rho as my
correlation between my x and my y.
I need to load ggplot 2.
And before I show you the plot,
let's check a couple of things.
Let's see what rho works out to be.
It works out to be about 0.5.
So the correlation between the father's
height and the son's height was 0.5.
So now let's go back up here and
I'll create my plot.
I'm going to do create assign
to the variable g, my ggplot.
I'm going to add the points.
But I'm going to do it in a way that
I have black in the background and
a salmon color on the foreground.
And that alpha blending makes
the points kind of transparent.
I want my x limits to be minus
4 to plus 4 on both axis.
I want my axis to be the same.
I also know that minus 4 to plus 4
should be pretty much all encompassing,
all encompassing of the data.
The probability of that, for example,
standard-normal, is below minus 4 or
above plus 4 is extremely low.
And Chebyshev's theorem also helps, so
if you've had the inference class,
you'll know that
a standardized random variable minus 4 to
plus 4 is pretty far out into the tail.
I'm going to, and, and let me show you
this plot before I add anything more,
any more layers to it.
So there's my plot.
Now, I'm going to add a layer
that is the identity line.
Okay.
Let's show that.
Then I'm going to add the axes,
the horizontal and vertical axes.
Let's show that.
Oh, and there's a slight mistake
that this should be h line.
[SOUND] Now, let's show that so
that now I actually have my two axis.
Okay, and now I'm going to create
the line where I treat the son's
height as the outcome and
the father's height as the predictor.
I'm going to add the line now
where I treat the son's height
as the predictor and
the father's height as the outcome.
Of course, the axes are rotated as I
discussed on the previous slide, and
so I need the slope to be 1 over rho.
Now let me get the plot I've created for
the two fitted lines.
I've doubled the width
of the fitted lines.
So next let's just talk about regression
to the mean as it relates to this plot.
Let's look at this plot, and describe,
use it to describe regression of the mean.
If the observations fell perfectly on
a line it would have to be, in this case,
the identity line because we've
normalized both the X and the Y.
So they would fall exactly
on this identity line here.
Just as a reminder,
the father's height is plotted,
plotted as the X variable and the son's
height is plotted as the Y variable.
So if we have a father's height of 2 and
there were no noise,
we would predict the son's
height to also be 2.
Here, the 2 representing 2 standard
deviations above the mean for
the fathers and 2 standard deviations
above the mean for the sons.
However, there is lots of noise
when we look at the data,
there's quite a bit of noise.
So the prediction is now, not 2, but
it's on the regression line, right here.
And because of how we set things
up this is simply multiplying
2 times the slope which
is the correlation.
And now the prediction comes over here,
which is between 2 and 0.
And in fact that is exactly 2
multiplied times the correlation.
That is the regression of the mean.
That multiplication is how Francis Galton
measured regression of the mean.
How shrunken this correlation is
towards horizontal line gives you
the extent of the regression to the mean.
If there, we, we talked about the case
where there was no noise, and this line
would fall perfectly on the identity line
consider the case where it's all noise.
The father's height had no
information about the son's height.
Then this line,
the correlation would be 0.
This line would be right
on the horizontal axis.
Then if you had to predict the father's,
the son's height from the father's height,
you would always wind up
with a prediction of 0.
So this phenomenon is regression
to the mean, and of course,
we can do the same thing with it flipped,
if we consider the son's
height as the predictor, and
the father's height as the outcome.
Then you can visualize this on this
plot because I've shown, basically,
that plot with this line right here, and
the regression to the mean is how
shrunken it is toward the vertical axis.
It's a pretty clever idea and
I, I think this, this was one
of the fundamental ideas that led to what
we now think of as modern regression.
However, the idea of
regression to the mean still
has an important place in statistics.
For example,
when you study longitudinal data,
it's important to think about
the idea of regression to the mean.